Good evening everyone and welcome to the
New York Public Library.
My name's Tony Marx and I'm the
president of the library. Whether you're
here in person or watching online, we
are so delighted to have you at
tonight's Live from NYPL.
We have two incredible writers with us,
Andrew Solomon
and the man of the evening, Siddhartha
Mukherjee.
So, they're here to talk about Sid's new
book, The Song of the Cell,
an exploration of medicine and our radic
and our radical new ability to
manipulate cells.
Uh it is the third in his exploration of
what it means to be human.
Uh in 2011, he joined us here in
discussion at the library of his
magisterial exploration of cancer, The
Emperor of all maladies, and in 2016
came back to explore the second, The
Gene: An Intimate History in 2016.
Uh we are so delighted and honored that
Sid is back for the third part.
Um The Song of the of the Cell is
available for sale here in the room or
through our shop online. Sid will be
glad to sign your copy after the
program. Uh of course, all proceeds from
your purchases will go to benefit the
New York Public Library.
In addition,
you can use your library card and borrow
it for free.
Sorry, Sid.
Um
Sid will be speaking tonight, as I said,
with Andrew Sullivan.
Andrew is uh
a writer,
a trustee of the library, a dear friend,
and has taught me and so many others in
such powerful ways
how difference
and love
work together and reinforce each other.
Really
life-changing work as well. If you
haven't read it, you must.
Um let me tell you about a little
advertisement.
Not worry, not a fundraiser. Um
Uh this Friday, our annual Halloween
costume party returns to the Stavros
Niarchos Foundation Library, and former
Project Runway host Tim Gunn
will be the guest judge.
Next week, the Bernstein Award winner
Andrea Elliott and past Bernstein
finalists Beth Macy will talk about
journalism, reporting American crises,
and their incredible new books.
We also have four-time Hugo Award winner
N.K. Jemisin talking about her latest
book with the one and only LeVar L.
All this and all more for free
to everyone.
But tonight, Siddhartha
and Andrew will have a conversation.
Siddhartha will be happy to take your
questions at the end.
If you're here in person, you'll see you
have note cards and cute little pencils.
Um and the incredible library staff who
are here will come around periodically
to pick up your questions and submit
them. If you're watching online, please
send your questions by emailing them to
publicprograms, that's one word,
publicprograms plural,
at nycl.org,
wherever you are. We'd love to hear from
you.
The Live from NYPL series is made
possible by the continuing generosity of
Celeste Bartos, Maniza Ishpahani Bartos,
and Adam Bartos.
And of course, by all of you and all New
Yorkers who love and support this
amazing institution.
Thank you for your support. Thank you
for being here tonight, for being part
of this important conversation.
Now, please join me in welcoming Andrew
Solomon and Siddhartha Mukherjee.
Uh let me echo those thanks to all of
you for being here and to Tony for that
generous introduction. And let me just
say that most of you have not yet had an
opportunity to read Siddhartha's
extraordinary
book, but perhaps many of you have had
the opportunity to read the previous
extraordinary books. I always say that
my primary claim to literary fame is
that I was the first person to blurb The
Emperor of All Maladies,
that I then reviewed the gene, and I'm
pleased to say that I'm quoted in
passing at least in in this text. And
part of what's so astonishing about
Sid's work is to have a real genius in
multiple areas that all intersect so
gracefully. In addition to personal
charm and dynamism,
there is his work as a doctor and the
patients he treat he treats, his
extraordinary ability to conjure those
people as three-dimensional people and
to see them fully and compassionately.
There's his ability as a writer to use
the English language with beauty and
grace and elegance. And there's
additionally his work as a researcher.
There are whole long branches of this
book that I looked at and thought
how on earth could he be doing that
research as well as that research while
writing his books.
So, it's it's a thrill and an honor to
be here on stage with you. This one to
me was in some ways the most exciting of
the three, maybe just because it's the
one that I've most recently read. But in
dealing with the cell, he really gets at
at a beautiful song, at an aria in
effect, about what it means
to look at life, what constitutes life,
what the boundaries are of life, what it
is that we now stand to do as we
understand life more deeply. And it
melds as is his wont history and science
and all kinds of other disciplines in
order to give a really full and rounded
picture. When I started in magazine
journalism, the wisdom was that it was
boring to write an all about story. You
had to have an angle.
But Siddhartha Mukherjee has made the
all about story into an absolute
centerpiece of our understanding of
humanity, of science, of life itself.
So, with that,
um
uh
I feel like there are a thousand
directions in which one could begin, but
I wanted to start actually with the
question of how you reconcile scientific
insight that you arrive at in a lab um
and the process of writing. It's obvious
that the science that you do feeds your
ability to write books, but I wondered
whether the writing of books also in
some ways feeds the work that you do as
a doctor and as a researcher.
Well, I um
First of all, thank you, Andrew. Um
and thank you to the New York Public
Library. Thank you to my family and my
wife.
Um
and everyone else who's here.
I write to think. Um
and I don't think I'm one of the first
person who's who's done that.
Um
The capacity to write allows me
to enter my my own mind and places in my
mind
which uh would otherwise be very hard to
enter.
So, a lot of my writing
enables a kind of thinking.
You know,
these books
are landscapes.
Um
They are um
the the economist uh today called it a
tour de horizon.
Um
and
when you tour a landscape, I think you
begin to understand
when you when you move above a
landscape,
um
5 ft, 10 ft, 20 ft,
200 ft, you begin to understand the
contours of that landscape very
differently
um as opposed to when you're sitting
inside uh uh the weeds.
Um
And for every single book,
my
ability to understand the contours
of a landscape, the landscape, has been
incredibly helpful in
in the sciences. Um because it's allowed
me to
understand where I came from
intellectually,
um and where we're going.
Um
cuz you can't understand where you're
going unless you know where you came
from.
And so, this idea of writing to think, I
mean, I
I'm not comparing myself to other great
writers who think, but
um Darwin did it famously.
Um
I'm always reminded of
I don't know how many people saw have
seen
um the first time
Charles Darwin wrote down or created the
um what's now considered the classic
phylogenetic diagram in which he divided
up the world, the evolutionary world,
into a tree.
Um
it's probably
I love diagrams, actually.
There are diagrams drawn by me in this
book. Um
but there's a lovely thing about that
diagram because on top of that, after
having finished
probably one of the most important
diagrams in the history of diagrams, he
wrote on top of that, I think.
Mhm. Um
because he wasn't absolutely he sure,
but but this idea of of writing to
think,
um I think is very important and really
motivates a lot of the work.
And when you talk about um
Darwin and about the way that he used
the progress of his own realization as a
means of narrating the insights at which
he ultimately arrived,
one of the things that's striking here
is that between passages, some of which
are quite densely scientific, accessible
because that's one of your remarkable
gifts, but densely scientific, you have
all of the historical stuff about how
so-and-so who was born to a
unlanded milkman in Nebraska or in
Suffolk or wherever it was made such and
such a discovery. And you give a lot of
those personal details. How does all of
that historical information illuminate
the insights about what we now know
about cells and cell biology? Well, I
think that historical information tells
you
um
where people came from um
and what they were thinking about um
and why they were thinking about those
things.
um
Robert Hook's an interesting example. um
He was born to an indigent family
um
uh but because he was so brilliant um
went to Wadham College and became
um
Robert Hook. um
What's interesting about Hook, who
actually is one of the first characters
we meet in this book, he's um he
actually was the first person to
visualize cells in plants. He didn't
fully understand
um
the context, but he was the first to
visualize.
And um I call his
uh his intelligence I say it's it's a
it was phosphorescent and elastic like a
rubber band that glows when it
stretches. um It's a little bit of a pun
because he of course Robert Hook
discovered elasticity. um He's the um
the the the the laws of elasticity are
named after him. um But he was a
physicist
uh an engineer
and um he mastered optics, mechanics,
architecture. Uh there's nothing that
was
nothing was left behind
um
and so
you need to understand
that person
um I think
um and their personhood
to understand them looking down a
microscope and saying I'm going to start
cutting up tissues and
looking in drops of water to try to find
what's on what what the microscopic
world is. By the way, he also
owned a telescope. But um
but while he was looking at the skies,
there's also microscopic my cosmos
um underneath and you need to understand
that person. um
I'll give you one more example
um
um of William Harvey. um In some ways
very very much the opposite of Hook. Um
didn't have a lot of instruments. Um
William Harvey discovered circulation.
um And he discovered the fact that the
that blood circulates. Before that, a
lot of people claimed that blood was
like a heating was a heating oil of the
body and would just heat all the other
organs
um and then go into dead ends.
Um
He discovered that it was circulatory
and that was the basis of our
understanding of of circulation, the
thing that keeps us alive. Um
And Harvey, unlike Hook, was not a
microscopist. He had very few tools. And
so his tools and there's a nice
illustration from his book.
um
um His tools were
a tourniquet.
um He would pinch things.
um And he would take animals and he
would take a little venule and bleed
them. Um And those were his three tools.
um
So he was
I think a person of incredibly austere
taste
both medically and also personally. He
had a He was offered a massive house
um because he became the
uh senior professor
um at uh at the hospital.
But he preferred to live in Ludgate in a
tiny house. And there's some connection
always between these people, their
interiority, their psychology, their
their desires and their presence that
informs their science. Um and that's why
we return to them. We make them That's
why I try to make them
three-dimensional. Because if you if
they're not to If you don't know
that Darwin had a
an almost spiritual crisis. Darwin's not
in this book, by the way.
But Darwin had a spiritual crisis. Um
you wouldn't know that that spiritual
crisis is what ultimately
led him
uh
to the ship
and led him to the Galapagos and
finally,
you know, throughout
um the theory of evolution. Um
but you have to know about that
spiritual crisis cuz you wouldn't
understand him otherwise. You wouldn't
understand the book
um otherwise.
It's one of the things that works very
powerfully in this book and in the
others and it made me wish that you were
my science teacher or my son's science
teacher because those personal
narratives do actually explain the logic
behind the discoveries and the memory of
who discovered what, when they
discovered it, and how one discovery
grew out of another makes much more
sense once it becomes a narrative of
human dynamics.
It's also striking that uh you appear to
have had personal interaction with
all of the most important scientists of
the late 20th and 21st centuries. There
are moments when I think, you met him,
too? How did you meet him? They're all
there. So, tell me how those personal
relationships that you built up with all
of these people, I don't know, Green
Garden, many others whom you whom you
catalog, how did those end up informing
you? Did you already have those points
of curiosity before you met them, or was
it talking to them that allowed you to
move toward the insights in the book?
You know, they're kind of random.
Um it doesn't seem random when they're
in the book, but they but they're kind
of random.
Um
uh Paul, I think Ursula's here. Did I
see Ursula? Hi, Ursula.
Um Ursula is Paul's wife. Um uh
Paul and Ursula and Sarah and I used to
go to Maine together um as part of a
slightly mad camp. Um which was very
dear to us, uh run by a woman named
Kippy Stroud, um who passed away, sadly.
Um and I met Paul walking along a beach.
Um and we became friends because Paul
was interested in everything.
Um
and um and I cooked him a meal. Um I
think I made
um
some kind of lobster stew or something.
And he said, "Wrong career."
Um as in he wanted me to be a cook. Um
so, anyway, so
um that's how I met Paul. Paul Nurse,
who discovered um
the way cells divide,
I met a completely different way. Um
I didn't even know that. I He and I were
supposed to be giving lectures together
at a university in Utrecht. Um and by
chance our planes landed together, so
they said, "Why don't you both go in the
same car?" Um but it was a long ride
from Amsterdam, and we were passing by,
and I started talking to him and I, you
know,
chatted with him for a while. Um, and so
that was a complete coincidence and he
told me everything. Uh, he's very
forthcoming and he just told me
everything. Um, who else comes to mind?
Um,
there's some physicians here. Helen
Mayberg, I think, may be here somewhere.
Um, I sought her out um, because I was
very interested in her in the work that
she was doing and how it begun to change
the way we think about um,
putting in electrodes into human brains
and
becoming new humans. Um,
so it it's it's a real mixture. I
sometimes seek them out because I am
very curious about why why they're doing
what they're doing. Sometimes I meet
them because the airline happens to be
landing at the same place at the same
time and sometimes um, it's it's a
windblown beach in in Maine.
So, the next time that you're in a
shared Uber, put away your cell phone.
Um,
you may have a best seller on your
hands.
You mentioned Helen and you had talked
about possibly wanting to read a passage
and since the passage you'd mentioned
involved Helen, though you may have
chosen another passage in the meanwhile,
why don't you choose something and read
aloud for a little
Yeah, I'd love to read. I And and while
he's finding his place, I would just
like to add that the cooking really is
very good. I left it off the list of
extraordinary and apparently
irreconcilable
uh, achievements.
Um,
Let me I'm still looking for it so you
can keep So, I can keep going on about
the um, the food, the writing. Um,
I I will at some point ask you about
metaphor. One of the things uh, that
sparkles here as elsewhere is that there
are an enormous number of metaphors that
make very difficult sounding ideas feel
very accessible and they seem to spring
almost out of nowhere. So, there's a
constant refrain of the way that certain
cells
in the immune system resemble the beaks
of different finches and a parallel with
evolution talking about how you would
have a sharp beak finch who had certain
abilities and a sort of spoon beak finch
who might have other abilities and how
the different functions of cells
resemble them. There are descriptions of
um uh great grandfathers. There are
descriptions of the way that parts of
cells chew up other parts of cells. I
think you've now found your passage, but
I can I can go on in this vein for hours
and hours.
Um so, I won't read Helen's passage just
because I read it at another reading.
So, I'll read a passage called the
citizen cell. Let me talk a little bit
before I do that about the structure of
this book because it's a very unusual
structure.
Um
and it was it took me a long time and
Nan Graham,
um editor and publisher who we share, um
um
and I talked a lot about how to
structure this book. Um
the structure of a book
is extraordinarily crucial.
Um
and you know that as a writer and of
course I know that as a writer, but it
is the first thing that you figure out.
Um
There are two things I think that are
very very important to figure out in
writing. Um
and I call them structure and mood.
Um you should know the mood of a book
before you know a book
and you should know the structure of a
book before you know a book. Um the rest
of it
follows.
Um
and
I struggled uh with the structure for
the following reason. Um in writing
nonfiction, you always
the the the you you always follow the
golden rule, which is chronology is your
best friend. Mhm.
Um
and um in Emperor, chronology was a
great friend because you could start at
you know, with the tosser the Greek
queen
who may or may not have had breast
cancer, and you end up in you know,
or 2010. Um and it's just chronological.
Um the gene had a semi-chronological
structure. Again, you begin with our
first conceptions of heredity. You then
move on and come to the discovery of
DNA, etc. etc. etc.
Um
Cell biology is very different. Um and
the history of the cell is very
different because there is a chronology
that begins it. You find
Leuwenhoek and Hook um characters that
we can talk about. Um
but then the structure becomes very
complicated because
it you can't say because everyone is
discovering things at the same time.
Um
and they're discovering things at the
same time, and they're often, you know,
obviously collaborating with each other,
but it would become um because the cell
itself is so functionally diverse. Um
your neuron looks nothing like a white
cell in your body, looks nothing like a
skin cell on your skin.
Um it would become absurd to go from the
neuron to the skin chronologically.
Um
So,
I um made a very bizarre and somewhat
radical decision that every chapter
would be a cell.
Um so every chapter then becomes a cell,
and each chapter is a mini chronology.
So, each chapter is a full history of
that cell, of the discovery, of what was
thought about it, and how it how it
changed over time. Um and so if a
chronology inside it, um but also it
signifies each chapter signifies some
functional property
of that cell that allows us to live.
So, that it becomes a book of life.
So, um every piece of it is has has
something to do with has something to do
with an essential quality of life.
Um sentience, in the case of your
neurons,
um
you know, it could be
uh immunity in the case of your immune
cells,
the carriage of metabolism and carrying
out of metabolism in the case of your
liver cells, etc. etc. etc. So, it's a
very uniquely structured book. Um
and I grew more and more fond of the
structure as I as I as I learned about
it. Um
anyway, so I thought I would read um
something that's because I just read a
a piece from Helen's book and it was
just published in The Guardian. So, I
would encourage people to read that
excerpt. Um but this is about the heart.
Um
it has its own chapter
and it's called the citizen cell.
Um
and it's subtitled the benefits of
belonging. Um and the reason is um to
take a step back,
the reason is that
um
constructing
you may think that
um
again, we don't think about it
typically, but constructing a pump
out of cells is not easy.
Um you have
a pump that doesn't coordinate its
motion is a wobbling balloon.
Um and if that pump couldn't coordinate
its motion, we wouldn't be alive. Our
circulation depends on it. Um even
primitive animals um have hearts where
there's a coordinated motion that they
pump together. Um
and that's citizenship,
um which is the idea of belonging, is of
course not just a metaphor for the heart
itself,
but as a larger metaphor for what the
heart signifies, which is also
belonging.
So, I I I thought that that there was
something quite kind of lovely about it.
Um
um
it um has a a quick quote to start with.
This is from Elias Canetti, Crowds and
Power, very important book. Um
And this whole idea of the crowd the
crowd suddenly there where there was
nothing before is a mysterious and
universal phenomenon.
A few people may have been standing
together, five, 10, or 12, not more.
Nothing has been announced, nothing is
expected. Suddenly everywhere is black
with people and more come streaming from
all sides as though the streets had only
one direction and only one power.
And this whole idea of belonging
together
and working together um
becomes very critical to the heart. So,
the way the heart works separately um is
that
unlike most cells in our body
the heart cells are all connected. Um
they have channels that connect them.
Such that when you spark um
a single spark in one cell the entire
organ contracts. Cuz it's contra- it's
taken that nervous impulse and moved it
through the entire organ so they can do
one big lub as they say. Um and it
contracts. And then when those ions when
those uh ions leave the cell, the entire
organ relaxes. And that's how you make a
pump. You make a pump by belonging and
every cell must belong. It belongs by
physically through channels, through
molecular channels connecting with each
other such that the ions going together
make one single pump and then they leave
together and the thing relaxes and so
forth. So, anyway, that's about cell
biology, but sometimes, as I said, I
don't I write about cell biology
and then I move on to other things.
Um the heart of all organs in the body
epitomizes belonging.
We use the word belong to signify
attachment or love, and the heart has
been the central signifier of that
feeling for millennia. Although, of
course, we know now know that much of
emotional life sits in the brain.
When you say my heart belongs to you,
you signify the link between that organ
and attachment.
As a child, my heart belonged to my
mother.
My father was a distant presence,
reliable and gentle, but reserved,
somehow unreachable.
His mother, my grandmother, lived with
us.
This is in a book about cell biology.
Scarred by her move during partition,
she kept to a room by herself, cooked
her own food, washed her own clothes,
almost as if the house was a temporary
shelter that might be snatched from her
hands at any time.
Uh I have no memory of her touching me.
Her heart, as they say, had been broken.
My transition into manhood marked a
different relationship with my father.
As a student at Stanford in a world
before cell phones and email, I began to
write to him.
At first, our letters were brief and
stilted, but over time, they grew longer
and warmer.
I began to understand him in a new
light.
His loss of home seemed familiar. In
1946, he had been uprooted from his
village when he was barely a teenager,
stuffed into an overnight ferry bound
for Kolkata,
a city on the edge of a nervous
breakdown.
In the late '50s, he had moved again as
a young executive to Delhi, a city as
culturally and socially alien to a young
man from East Bengal as the
Frisbee-slinging, FroYo-guzzling,
beer-ponging life of my California dorm
seemed to me.
I longed to be back home even for a
short while.
One afternoon, I picked up my mail and
found a heavy packet. It surprised me
with tickets to return to Delhi in my
first winter.
It was a 16-hour flight and I slept
through it until the fog-choked lights
of the city came into view.
And the plane made that elephant squeak
sound of the wheel hatch opening just
before landing.
Since that trip, I must have flown to
India four dozen times, but it's
it's a sound that makes my heart bound
with a strange joy.
The man at customs asked me for a small
bribe and I felt like hugging him. I was
home.
I can still feel the boom of my
heartbeat as I exited the airport. I
could tell you about the neural cascade
I experienced, but while the stimulus
was triggered in the brain, the
experienced was felt in my heart. Coming
back, belonging.
And then just a few
pages later
is exactly what I said, but to imagine
the heart mechanically as a pump is to
forget the central conundrum. How do you
make a pump out of cells?
An an uncoordinated pump is no better
than a wobbling balloon. And then we
enter deep history. In 1912, Alexis
Carrel, a French scientist at the
Rockefeller Institute in New York, cut a
small fragment of the heart of an
18-day-old chick fetus and grew it in in
liquid culture. Um after first washing
and the the culture grew very
extensively, and when he removed and
recultivated a piece, he found it still
capable of pulsing.
Carrel's experiment was widely heralded
as proof that organs could live and
function outside the body, but it did
signal an equally important idea. The
cells of the heart cultivated outside
the body had an autonomous capacity and
a capacity to pulse pulsate together
rhythmically, reminding me of Canetti's
crowd.
Something intrinsic about the cells made
them capable of the pump-like action.
It was a live demonstration
of belonging.
So,
um
just that passage, I guess, shows you
some of the process by which I write. Um
I make
when I write, I make no distinction
between moving between memoir
and
um
deep history,
um contemporary history, a conversation
in a car,
um
everything gets thrown into the pot.
Um
and it becomes a little bit of a stone
soup.
Well, it becomes a little bit of a soup.
I think not a stone soup, but a sort of
rich one um and filled with uh wonders
of every description. And without a
stone. And the reversions to narratives
of India uh historical narratives India
um
uh tales and stories that are
traditional in India, it makes a lovely
rhythm through the book. And there are
other narratives in it that are more
likely to be familiar to an American
audience, and those are actually quite
illuminating. I was particularly taken
with the one of the uh metalsmith, which
I think wasn't in fact was it Indian?
The metalsmith who makes the armor that
no spear can puncture, and the spear
that can puncture any armor. And the
question of how they would uh interact
dynamically. That one might have been
Chinese. Uh his was Chinese, yes. But
yes. Um but uh ventures into Asia.
The question that seemed to me to be
central to the book, and perhaps central
to this moment, is the question of the
status of science at a time when in the
larger American public there has been so
much of an attack on the notion of
science itself. You have a chapter on
the pandemic, and you talk about the
ways that we've come to understand it.
And you talk about the mysteries that we
cannot possibly unlock. And you give a
wonderful narrative of why SARS um
COVID-2 and its many variants were more
successful at if one wants to use the
word successful at spreading than were
many other coronaviruses and many other
potentially pandemic inducing
attacks on the healthy ecosystem. But in
the face of the pandemic, one of the
things that seemed to happen as people
refused vaccines and refused masks and
refused all of the rest of these
interventions was that there was a sense
that science was somehow an egg-headed
pursuit of coastal liberals and was
therefore irrelevant to the actual lived
experience of ordinary Americans who
didn't have to bother with all of that
stuff. And part of what this book
accomplishes so beautifully, though I
think it's unlikely to reach those
populations who are questioning the
nature of science,
uh is to argue very persuasively for the
clear, logical, complex, and highly
personal way that science has developed
and the way that each insight has led to
another insight and by the end of the
book, an almost ecstatic description of
all of what those insights have already
led to and could in turn lead to. So,
what do you make of the politicization
of the idea of science itself?
Well, I think it's very unfortunate,
um obviously, um
that's uh that's the problem. Um
I think that
um
part of the reason
behind the politicization
is that
uh
people have
uh begun to think of themselves
um as invincible, uh politically
invincible,
socially invincible, um and so forth. Um
but it's of course vulnerability
that brings people in some ways
vulnerability brings people to science.
And I mean vulnerability in both ways. I
mean vulnerability in the sense of not
understanding.
So, you don't understand the question.
That's what brings scientists to
science, a young person to science, a
kind of feeling of
a desire to understand. Um but also mean
vulnerability in terms of disease,
illness. Um
it is um
remarkable
uh the um
uh
SARS-CoV-2 was very unusual because the
people who were the sickest and the most
vulnerable um
were were elderly. Um the young felt
invincible, invulnerable, um at least
physically. And it was in the young, it
was in that group in particular where
the anti-science sentiment really sort
of caught fire and grew, although of
course that's not just a group. Um the
reason I bring this up is that
um
often people come to science because of
the other vulnerability that we have,
not the vulnerability to ask questions,
but when they're sick. Um when when when
they encounter disease, either in
themselves or in their parents, um
all of a sudden this thing, this
eggheaded
uh business that seems to be so far away
from them
uh hits them home.
Um
and
um
people suddenly begin to realize that
this conversation that we're having uh
not this conversation, but the
scientific conversation that we're
having across generations has very much
to do with um
the alleviation of suffering.
Um
and I think
part of the problem
um
is
for us
to recognize
what the source of invincibility is
and to simultaneously recognize and to
simultaneously be empathetic to the
vulnerability. I don't hate
anti-scientists.
Um
I do.
I I I I I I
I I find them bizarre. I don't
understand them.
Um
but I also think that that a lot of that
sentiment comes from a sentiment of
invincibility.
And I think that they
become
much much more um
or much less anti-science
when
the vul- when they feel the
vulnerability that inevitably will come
um as they age
um and as they encounter science as not
just uh you know, eggheaded people
writing equations,
but um doctors and nurses and and and
others uh
doing doing their job, which is why I
think medicine is very is a very special
science. Medicine is the one science
that will absolutely touch you in your
life.
There will be no time There will be no
one
in this audience, I can guarantee, that
will not be touched by medicine and by
that vulnerability. Um and I think as a
as a writer,
um to expose that vulnerability
um and the lack of invincibility, the
inability to answer questions. We don't
have answers to all questions, and it's
frustrating, um
but being honest about it um
is I think helps the the the the deep
politicization that we're going through
through right now. Um
and I think, as I said, medicine is one
way that we ultimately reach
um
the anti-science crowd.
I think that's a very profound insight.
I have written a lot about mental
illness, as you know, and I'm working on
a book about child suicide at the
moment, and the people I've spoken to
who have been touched by it all express
a kind of incredulity
at how little there is out there about
it. And I find over and over again it's
not merely that people haven't yet
arrived at vulnerability. It's that
people don't want to acknowledge the
very possibility of vulnerability and
think that by denying or ignoring these
problems they somehow can perpetuate the
notion that they are not vulnerable to
the tragedies that they've seen
affecting other people. I think there's
a strong psychological mechanism in it
as well. Well, and and you know,
interestingly, I mean maybe I'll ask you
a question, Andrew. I mean it it seems
to me that that some of those people um
they come from so many different walks
of life. Some of those people when they
encounter the death of a child um
maybe not all of them, but some of them
may begin to ask questions about what
happened,
um
potentially questions about minds and
brains and how brains develop, how
social circumstances influence the
brain, um and in beginning to ask those
questions they don't go all the way, but
I think they it it opens a discussion um
perhaps in their minds about the
possibility that that they can also
contribute to this to the the egghead
who writes equations, um
and so I think the the community of
science is also polarized. Scientists
themselves are polarized.
Um
and so I think that that a a
a more welcoming way um of
dealing with anti-scientists
not easy, but a more welcoming way may
be one way forward.
I think that's true, and I think part of
what's striking about this book as
indeed about the past ones. In the first
one I sort of thought, well, here's
Siddhartha Mukherjee, he's a very
accomplished oncologist, and he knows a
great deal about cancer, and it was an
enormously broad book because cancer is
an enormously broad topic. But, it was
still effectively about an illness that
probably affects almost everyone
directly or indirectly. Um
but that nonetheless remains quite
specific. The Gene seemed to open this
up further and to talk about the whole
nature of how people are constructed and
how we've all come to be ourselves.
I think cell biology, and part of what's
revelatory about reading this, has roots
that go back a very, very long way. But,
essentially, cell biology as we know it
is far newer than any of the other
things that you have been looking at.
And actually, in many instances,
shockingly new. Things that I learned in
ninth grade, which was now quite some
time ago, but not so long ago. Um
that I didn't realize had been
discovered only a few years before I got
to ninth grade. And so,
one of the things that this book has,
which the Gene also had, but which this
book has in particular, is a kind of
shimmering notion of where this will
lead us.
Which you expressed with some
reservations about what it means to
enter any form of post-human future, but
which you nonetheless talk about as
being the basis for our expanding
insights into human life and indeed all
life, and the connectedness of all life,
and the relationship between the basic
science and the clinical applications,
which can often be so long and so slow,
seems here to progress with unusual
speed and clarity. And so, I wonder how
you contrast thinking about the cell
with thinking about the Gene.
Well, it it it um
in some ways the books
are
uh
in in in a little bit of a mumbo jumbo
order. Um
if I had to re- if I had to read the
books, I'd read the Gene first, then the
Cell, and then the emperor of maladies.
Because the gene is a unit of
information,
the basic unit of information. But the
cell is the basic unit of life.
Um
what people often don't realize is that
genes are in DNA, obviously. Uh except
for some sub viruses, but genes are in
DNA.
But the molecule of DNA is lifeless. It
is a molecule, it's a chemical. If you
eat it, it will go right through your
system. Um I was outside a a Botox
clinic in Brazil, not getting Botox.
Walking.
As one does outside a Botox clinic in
Brazil. Give it a year or two. Exactly.
And it was called the life clinic, and
there was a picture of DNA.
Um
but of course it that had nothing to do
with anything. We were not injecting
DNA. But um
realized that this has become an icon.
DNA has become an icon of life, and yet
it's lifeless. Mhm. Um it's the cell
that enlivens the gene. It's the cell
that makes the gene come alive. Um and
in fact, if we really speak about life
and the properties of life, we have to
speak about the cell. Um and we have to
speak about, um you know, what the cell
does and what the cell can do. Um
the second question that you asked
implicitly is about the post human um
world. Um
And I make a very important distinction
in that post human world. Um
and I want that distinction to to remain
as one of the big distinctions that I
that I talk about. I make the
distinction between disease and desire.
Um
disease of course has to do with
suffering. Desire has to do with
augmentation. And for the very long for
very long time, these two words, disease
and desire, lived in different
universes. Um partly because we couldn't
do very much uh uh scientifically or
otherwise.
Um but over time these words have
started coming together um
in some ways that are fantastic and some
ways that are less fantastic. Um
and um
I I'll give you one example, which is
kind of an interesting example. When the
first um IVF baby, Louise Brown, was
born,
um many obstetricians and many
bioethicists
um said that infertility is not a
disease. Human beings have been living
with infertility forever, so why define
it as a disease? And
and
others,
not everyone, argued that that that
there's an aching
to have a child. Not for everyone, but
for some there was an aching to have a
child and they were suffering. And there
was suffering associated with having a
child. Now we completely assume,
not for everyone, but for some people
that that aching is a form of suffering,
and
hundreds of thousands of babies have
been born with IVF.
Um
should we, as you ask in your um
previous book, extend those principles
to people with extreme short stature?
Should we extend those that
blurring of disease and desire to people
who are deaf?
Um people who are blind or partially
blind?
Um
I think these questions are becoming
increasingly urgent, as I concluded at
the end of my book, as the two worlds of
genetic engineering and cellular therapy
come together. And it's really important
to know that they have to come together.
A gene put into the wrong place, a wrong
cell, in the wrong
part of the body at the wrong time is is
a is a chemical.
Um it is the confluence of cellular
engineering and gene therapy, which is
bringing disease and desire into a place
that we don't know, a very unknown
place.
Um
And the only way that the book proposes
to resolve that is to to live outside or
to bring yourself outside the world of
science. Um science can give you facts.
Um it can provide information, it can
provide manipulation, um but it cannot
provide a framework to understand the
distinction between these two words,
which have inhabited our vocabulary for
for the begin from the beginning of of
human life, uh
200 odd thousand years ago.
Uh I could go on asking questions for
hours, but apparently some of the rest
of you wish to do so as well.
So, let me move on to some of the
audience questions that have come up.
Here's one.
Do you think it's possible to apply our
evolving understanding of cellular
mechanisms and function toward an
understanding of the nature of
consciousness itself in both human and
other forms of life?
Um tough question. Um
Um I think there are
strong attempts
to understand consciousness through
science.
Um
it would require more than uh just cell
biology. Um
we know how a neuron works, we know how
circuits of neurons work, we can
manipulate circuits of neurons, um but
that doesn't equal consciousness. Um
I think we will require tools from
computational biology, from uh com- from
computation, um
from what is called artificial
intelligence,
um to create a simulacrum
of what we call intelligence.
The problem is that it's going to be
very difficult to compare that
simulacrum of intelligence
to the actual process that goes on to
create sentience and consciousness.
And certainly it'll be, I think,
impossible. So, I think we'll get
somewhere there.
Um I am doubtful that we will get to
using these kinds of models. I'm
doubtful in conjunction with cell
biology. I'm doubtful that we will get
to what I consider the more profound
forms of of conscious thinking which
might include things like love and
um
belonging and
uh
desire and
um
compassion. Um
I think we'll lie outside the realms of
at least what we have right now. We'll
probably need to invent a new science
um
to create again simulacra of those
and even then they will remain simulacra
because our capacity to understand what
is actually happening
um in the brain
uh will lie outside it. But, you know,
I'm I was only briefly a neuroscientist.
I was a neuroscientist for a while, but
only briefly. So, um
I think this question is a little bit
above my pay grade.
But, I think it's actually part of what
you do accomplish in the book, which is
not only to describe what science can
do, but to describe the
I don't know, the words are all so
trouble with the mystical or spiritual
or unknowable, at least, dimension of
human experience that it can't address.
Uh here's one. Do you think that life
sentience is a property of
individual cells or an emergent property
of an aggregation of cells?
Well, I'm almost certain that sentience
is a property of aggregations of cells.
Um and I'm almost certain that life is
the property of an individual cell. Um
Um I think um sentience I think cells
have function.
Um they have agency. But that agency is
linked to their function. So, when a
white blood cell goes to
um
uh capture an infection
or when a neuron fires, that is number
one living, and number two, that has
agency.
Um but that agency should not be
confused with
um
things like sentience. Um
agency is not sentience. Sentience is a
much more complex characteristic. Um and
so, I think that
um sentience usually appears, the way we
understand sentience again, um in common
language, usually appears
um in multicellular beings.
Uh although, as I said, you if you were
to you could define agency as as as
sentience. Um but that's not how we in
common parlance, how we define
sentience. Right. So, it becomes partly
a linguistic question.
Yes. Um and connects, I think, to your
description. There's a very
compelling description which I suggested
you read, and then you chose to read
something else, um
of your own experience with depression
and what that was like and how it
changed your perspective. How would you
say shifted your understanding of
neurons and consciousness and their
complex interrelatedness. That, and of
course, the work of scientists,
including Helen Mayberg, who I think is
here this evening.
Well, you know, you have you have to
hold a duality when you think about um
mental illness. Um you have to hold a
duality that on on
on one hand that that's an organic
property of
cellular dysfunction. I go back to
Rudolf Virchow who um makes a very
important statement a very audacious
statement as a young man um adding the
last two principles of cell biology.
The first is that all normal physiology
is the consequence of cellular
physiology. No one had dared to say that
before. Um and if you really think about
it, it really changes the conception of
the human body.
And the second sentence is just its
converse. All illness
is cellular dysfunction. Now,
what is not He's not denying that
environments can impinge on cells as
they do in mental illness
um or that uh sometimes it can happen
without the environment impinging on
cells, but ultimately when it when it
all when all of the factors
um social, economic, environmental,
parental, etc. are taken into account,
ultimately it involves a dysfunction of
cells.
Um
that statement is
profoundly radical. Mhm. Um
because it reconceives the entire notion
of illness.
Um
and it also allows us to as physicians
to tackle illness in a way that we can
tackle illness. That is not to say that
that we should not be
in other words, it is to say that we
should be equally attentive and are
attentive to all the the milieu that's
causing that cellular cellular
dysfunction. Um
but of course, we can't solve that
milieu. Um I can't solve
at least as a physician cannot solve the
crises that precipitate mental illness.
Um
but
someone like Helen or others um can find
the circuit
um in the brain where which may be
responsible ultimately for the um
behavioral and cognitive and um
and
the feeling as it were as the effective
emotional being
and intervene on that circuit by putting
in tiny electrodes
restimulating it
and in fact being successful at
at least ameliorating
many cases of recalcitrant depression.
Now
it's very important to remember that I
what I'm not saying what I'm not saying
is I'm not saying depression is caused
by those that neural circuit.
What I am saying is that there could be
a thousand reasons that could be as I
said there's a milieu.
But what I am saying is that it as
someone who experienced depression
myself
you have to hold both the ideas in your
head that there is an organic cause and
there can be a cause that comes from the
milieu.
We as physicians can't
some of us try but can't intervene with
the with the with the milieu certainly
psychotherapists do talk therapists do
but we can and are increasingly able to
intervene on the what I call the least
final cause.
You can't prevent
as I said you may or may not be able to
prevent that milieu but you can
potentially intervene the least final
cause
and there's a dichotomy there that it is
not
I'm I'm not saying this without some
trepidation
because it it it
in the wrong hands
it you begin to believe that the organic
cause is the ultimate cause
and you confuse
the organic cause so you have to hold
the duality
in in your hands at the same time
that there could be a
a least common pathway which you can
intervene on
but you would prefer of course
to change the milieu that caused that
least common pathway. Yeah. I think it's
a conflation of treatment and ideology
that you might begin to feel better when
your serotonin levels go up, but that
doesn't mean the reason you felt bad was
because your serotonin levels were low
anymore than a house fire that can be
put out with water indicates that your
house caught fire because it should have
had more water in it. Um
here's a uh question that I rather like.
How do we improve medical education in
terms of language to tap into
non-scientifically curious children and
youth?
Um I think that um
I I think language is really obviously
very important to me and important to
you.
Um I think
um the the
the key is to avoid jargon. Um and and
to convince people of
of how um
of the emotional density
that that that the language carries.
Um
I think people think of about about
medical language as being jargonistic
and and useless, but there's an
incredible amount of emotional density
that a word carries in medicine. Um
when you're talking to someone, every
word, and I do this for a living,
word carries a
is made out of lead.
Um and it it it falls like a like a drop
of lead um um into that first person's
um consciousness. Um if you allow
children who are scientific or
non-scientific to realize that emotional
density and to own it,
um I think we would vastly improve
medical education.
I would add, just looking at my own
children, uh that uh I think often there
is is to treat science as an
accumulation of facts. And of course,
science involves a great many facts and
it's useful to know them. But if you
don't get at what you've just described,
the emotional content and the larger
significance that those facts point
toward, they're not very interesting and
learning them becomes just an exhausting
and repetitive labor. If you are able to
come back to the point that you clearly
are able to reach in communicating with
your patients, but also in this book in
communicating with the world, of showing
that these facts actually are
significant because with them, you can
perhaps change your experience of the
world, your ability to stay alive, and
so on and so forth.
Absolutely. I mean, that that's the
whole point. That that that's That is
the That is the emotional density that's
carried by science. I think that And
people lose it. People say science is
facts. Of course, it's not facts.
It's adventure. It's
uh
It's
um exhilarating.
Um
I often tell people I often tell my
graduate students um you know, they're
doing in the middle of a project and
I'll say
at the end of this project, you will own
a slice of the universe.
Um and it sends a chill up my spine. You
will own a slice of the universe and no
one else will own it. It'll be yours
forever.
And that slice of universe, that slice
of the cosmos, will be something that
you completely own. Um
and I think I hope that inspires them.
I'm going to end because sadly we're at
the end with um a question that seems
appropriate for ending with. Someone has
written in, "Which cell is your personal
favorite?"
All right.
It's It's uh It's a tough choice. I like
so many of them. Uh
You know, I I I
I'll I'll give you an example. Um
I I particularly like T I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
Uh
I was telling you behind in the in in
the room that um
the proudest thing I've done in my life
is to create um T-cell treatments for
the first time in India.
So, we've treated 10 children
um so far. It's not available. These are
children who would die from refractory
relapse leukemia.
Um
and they couldn't afford it. In this
country, they can't afford it, of
course. It costs about
a million about a million dollars if you
take in all the other therapy. Um we're
offering it to them for free for now in
trial and at a radically slashed price,
but
um
T-cells are what are used to kill um
their cancer. So, we extract the T-cells
from their body, we genetically modify
them, weaponize them, grow them up in
these dishes in a completely sterile
factory. You have to enter with a hazmat
suit. And you and we then give them back
to the children. It's very toxic
therapy, so there is doctors that
monitor it, but
it is, I think, the proudest moment of
my life when
I saw the first child cured. Um
I
uh
It's uh
hard to describe that joy. It's
uh
I think it's impossible to describe that
joy, but um
that child is walking around uh went
home.
And uh left me a picture of an elephant.
Well, that again is part of what's so um
very
uh impressive and astonishing about the
book. First of all, uh I certainly knew
many people who had HIV or AIDS and who
struggled with them and I had endless
conversations with people about their
T-cell counts without ever understanding
really what a T-cell did. And reading
this book, among its many many gifts
gave me that knowledge which has really
allowed me to reassess in retrospect the
experiences of beloved friends, some
still alive and some no longer alive.
Well, sorry.
But the book I think is also, as you've
just described, it's infused with a
great deal of hope. I think someone said
about the gene that it reads like a
thriller, and there are moments in this
in which you're sort of moving toward
understanding what happened in a
particular instance or particular
circumstance that are quite thrillery.
But I think the overall message of the
book that feels to me as riveting and as
electrifying as a thriller is to say, we
came to this insight, this insight, this
insight, and perhaps sickle cell anemia
can be brought under control. Perhaps
these children don't have to die
anymore, and you write about them with
such intimacy and such compassion, and I
think it's a an extraordinary
achievement to be able to do that while
at the same time teaching so much that
we might not know. Thank you very much.
Thank you all.